# SROP Project with CERN
## Searching for a Method to Study a New Particle though Proton Collisions with a Specific Decay Chain
### Search for Displaced Vertices of Tau Lepton Pairs from Z’ Decay in Proton-Proton Collisions at Truth Level with Monte Carlo Simulations

This project was with The Ohio State University's Summer Research Opportunities Program (SROP) and in collaboration with The European Organization for Nuclear Physics (CERN) and the ATLAS Experiment. The purpose of the study was to examine the feasibility of using ATLAS detector and the LHC to search for a theorized long-lived Z' boson.

#### Background on CERN, LHC, ATLAS, and the Standard Model:
CERN is home to the largest and most powerful particle accelerator in the world, the Large Hadron Collider (LHC). It is a whopping 17 miles in circumference and is located 574 feet underground straddling the Swiss-French border in Geneva, Switzerland. The LHC accelerates protons to near light speeds and collide them to examine their decays, new particles, and properties. The ATLAS experiment is the largest and most complex detector of the 4 at the LHC and the one that my team and I worked with. ATLAS is set up at a collision point and analyzes data about the collision and its products including daughter particles, locations, velocities, and more. Lastly, the Standard Model of particle physics is the most widely accepted model which is used to describe 3 of the 4 fundamental forces. In this model, the Z boson has a very short lifetime and mediates the weak nuclear force, explaining particle transformations. Although the Standard Model is a great representation of the majority of physics, it fails to unify and accurately describe all of the forces.

#### Monte Carlo Simulations Background:
My team and I worked at CERN's main campus in Geneva, Switzerland. There, I created, ran, and analyzed proton-proton collision simulations and forced them to a specific decay chain. These simulations have been proven to be a very accurate depiction of the physical situations and the interactions with the detector. Therefore, it is in researchers best interest to simulate the experiements before conducting them physically. Therefore, I wanted to see if it would be feasable to use ATLAS to search for the existence of a Z' boson. A Z' boson is a theorized particle that resembles a longer lived version of the original Z boson and goes beyond the Standard Model of particle physics. 

#### My Simulations:
I forced the protons to create a pair of scaler bosons upon collision (a generic particle spin 0 boson with variable mass) which would then each decay into a Z' and then a pair of tau particles. In order for this study to work with the detector, the final tau particles must be close enough together (~<1mm vertexing resolution) at their decay for ATLAS's vertexing algorithm to accurately trace the final particles as coming from the same location. The vertexing algorithm takes the particles' locations, directions, and speeds to predict where they came from. This means that both tau particles need to be accurately predicted as coming from the same location at the Z' decay in order to be worthwhile. Therefore, in running my simulations, I adjusted the parameters of the scaler and the Z' masses to find how the tau displacement changed with these varying mass combinations. I ran simulations with 11 mass combinations and 20,000 collisions per simulation totaling 220,000 collisions. 

### Results:
In running these simulations, I found that on average there was a shorter tau displacement when the scaler mass was much larger that the Z' mass. This is most likely because as their mass difference becomes larger, more of the scalers total energy goes into the Z' velocity rather than its mass. This means that the Z' will be travelling faster and thus its daughter particles (the taus) will be more collimated and stay closer together for longer to conserve this momentum. In the simulation in which the parameters resulted in the smallest tau separation, only ~2% of the tau pairs had a separation less than 1mm at their decay (around 400 of 20,000 events). This result is too inefficient to justify a full study with ATLAS and the LHC. Running experiments with ATLAS takes tremendous amounts of resources including time, electricity, personnel, money, etc. Therefore, with such a low simulation success rate, it seems as if an alternative method would need to be found with a higher success rate before attempting to pass full resources into a physical study. Although the study was found to be infeasible, it was a success in that it helps researchers to narrow their search. Alternative decay chains or different untested mass combinations could be examined by future researchers in simulations to possibly yeild more consistent results.


